# -*- coding: utf-8; mode: structured-text -*-

= Overview =

Among others, the three biggest platforms for desktop computers and laptops
are: GNU/Linux, Microsoft Windows and Apple's Mac OS X. It is not so easy to
recommend any one of them as they are quite different and offer qualities in
different areas. They have their advantages and deficiencies. Thus we present
all of them in the following sections.

Mobile devices are today becomming small computers on their own. We show this
on the example of Apple's iOS, which we have choosen for its very good
accessibility support.

Since many times it might be useful to combine two or more different platforms
for different tasks, the last section of this chapter deals with combining
platforms, interoperability and virtualization.

Table of Contents: @TOC@

== GNU/Linux ==

GNU/Linux is an environment largely based on the [http://www.gnu.org Free
Software] development model. It's very versatile, secure and comfortable. Most
of its components are distributed free of charge and thus accessible even to
people with little financial resources. The way of being able to install
applications just by searching for their name, without a need to care about
their cost, DVDs or licensing, can be very convenient.

From the point of view of accessibility, a good thing about it is that many
actions can also be accomplished using a set of textual command line tools,
which might be easier to handle for a visually impaired user than graphical
interfaces.

The various systems and tools in GNU/Linux are usually packed in distributions,
such as Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora or others. The task of distributions is to put
all the available pieces together in a reasonable way. This guide largely deals
with Ubuntu, but most of the information is valid for other distributions as
well.

[overview-gnu-linux More on GNU/Linux]

== Mac OS X ==

Mac OS X is a popular UNIX-based desktop operating system.  It is known for its
intuitive, elegant and easy to use user interface.  Users can search for and
install applications, both free and paid, from the Mac App Store.  Many well
known applications are available for Mac OS X, like Microsoft Office, or Steam
with Valve's games.

From the accessibility point of view, every machine with Mac OS X comes with a
screen reader called VoiceOver and English voices.  Braille display support for
selected displays is also included, and magnification support is also provided
by VoiceOver.  Therefore, blind or visually impaired English-speaking user can
literally start using the Mac computer right after unboxing it.

Situation is much more complicated for non-English users, who have to buy
voices for their language and get Braille input tables for their language.

Apple tests all its applications so that they work with VoiceOver.  So you can
use the built-in apps like Mail, Safari (internet browser), Address Book, iCal
and others and be sure that they provide reasonable experience with VoiceOver.

== iOS ==

iOS is a derivative of the Mac OS X operating system designed specifically for
touchscreen mobile devices.  It runs on iPhone, iPad and iPod touch.  Users can
install and update their apps, both free and paid, using the App Store.

iOS comes with built-in screen reader VoiceOver, which is the first touchscreen
screen reader.  It uses touch gestures for navigating in the screen reader.
iOS also ships with synthetic voices for over 30 languages and supports reading
different parts of user interface using the appropriate language ("language
switching").  iOS also ships with out-of-the box support for many bluetooth
Braille displays and Braille tables for many languages.

== Microsoft Windows ==

Microsoft Windows is currently the most widely used operating system.
It offers a wire range of applications and compared to the other
platforms, it is best often the platform that is best supported by
third party companies. The former problems with stability and security
issues were largely overcome in the recent versions.

Though the platform is largely proprietary and it is also common to have to pay
for most new software, many Free Software packages are also available on
Windows, including accessibility packages.  These include the Firefox web
browser, OpenOffice office suite, the NVDA screen reader and the
Emacs+speechd-el environment.

== Combining platforms ==

Sometimes, it is useful to be able to run more platforms at the same time. For
example a GNU/Linux user might sometimes want to start Microsoft Windows, use a
special application which is only available on Microsoft Windows (such as
Microsoft Word) and then move the resulting file back to his GNU/Linux desktop
in some convenient manner. Or perhaps a Mac OS X user wants to use Ubuntu
GNU/Linux sometimes because there is some clever application which is missing
or costly on Mac OS X.

On most today computers, it is perfectly possible to run another operating
system or another platform in what looks just like an ordinary application
window on your desktop. In this way, you can start even several so-called
virtual computers and do with them whatever you like. They have access to the
network or to the soundcard and moving files between them can be as easy as
between any other applications in your desktop. You can take the machine on a
flash disk and continue using it on another computer, which might be
particularly interesting for accessibility purposes. There is of course some
pretty heavy logic beneath to make this possible, but today technologies spare
the user these details and are very easy to use.

There are several virtualization technologies available, such as Virtual Box,
Xen, Virtuozzo or VMWare. We recommend VMWare Player, because it is at the same
time free of charge, cross platform, well accessible, easy to use and quite
powerful.

Bellow you can find information about how to install and use it:

 * VMWare Player on GNU/Linux:
    * [gnu-installation#vmware Installation of VMWare]
    * [gnu-usage#vmware Usage of VMWare]



